---
layout: post
title: "Using git & GitHub"
excerpt: "A practical guide on contributing to projects on GitHub. We cover the basics of git (add, commit, branch merge) and then move on to features of GitHub (remote, push, issues and pull-requests)"
share: false
author: alex
image:
    feature: http://zpalexander.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/git.jpg
tags: [git, talk, tutorial, lecture, meeting, notes]
---

## Outline

* **Introduction**
    - Git vs. GitHub
        + Git is a command line tool written by the creator of Linux, Linus Torvalds.
        + GitHub is a website implemented in ruby-on-rails which allows users to store their git repositories on the internet and provides additional tools for managing permissions and reviewing contributions to the repository.
        + Over time, they have become increasingly synonymous, but it is important to understand that GitHub could be swapped out for BitBucket, GitLab, or any other server hosting a git repositiory. Git is entirely decoupled from any online services and has a standard interface for hooking up what are referred to as 'remote repositories'
* **Git Basics**
    - Philosophy
        + Thinking about Structure (and how this influences the types of commands)
        + working directory / staging area / repository / remote
    - Basic Usage
        + status
        + commit
        + add / rm
        + branch / checkout / HEAD
        + merge / basic conflicts
    - Advanced Usage (might not do)
        + Rebase
        + Reflog
        + General tips
            * Undeleting files
            * stash
            * Undeleting commits
            * Hooks
* **Working with GitHub**
    - Branching vs. Forking
        + What's an 'upstream tracking branch'?
        + remotes
    - Workflow
        + Issues & Pull-Requests
        + 'code review'
* **A Practical Example**
    - Contributing to the new MDST website


_These are the notes I used for the talk I gave on the 26th of May, 2016 at the MDST meeting._

## Introduction

Git has a reputation of being difficult to grok on first pass. While this reputation is not totally undeserved, a good tutorial can make all the difference. This post aims to teach the reader the basic workflow for contributing to a project on GitHub. With this goal in mind, we shall begin with a few words on the difference between git and GitHub. Hopefully this will give us a bit more context for the concepts introduced later on. If not--well, a little history never hurt anyone!

Git is a command line tool written by the creator of Linux, Linus Torvalds. GitHub is a website implemented in ruby-on-rails which allows users to store their git repositories on the internet and provides additional tools for managing permissions and reviewing contributions to the repository. Over time, they have become increasingly synonymous, but it is important to understand that GitHub could be swapped out for BitBucket, GitLab, or any other server hosting a git repositiory. Git is entirely decoupled from any online services and has a standard interface for hooking up what are referred to as 'remote repositories'

## Philosophy

- Philosophy
    + Underlying Structure (and how this influences the types of commands)
    + working directory / staging area / repository / remote

As with most great tools used by software engineers for decades at a time, git was written by a Linux kernel hacker over the course of a few long weekends in April, 2005. As with many tools sharing this type of lineage, there are two things you can be sure of:

1. Git is beautifully designed, with everything you could want out of a version control system (vcs).
2. Git is incredibly non-user friendly, requiring a deep understanding of the underlying data structure to make full use of the tool.

The good news is that basic usage of git is actually pretty simple, and understanding git as a data structure can be done by drawing it out--just like all the other data structures you've learned. When in doubt, draw it out!

### Thinking about Structure

The fundamental objects in git are commits, and pointers to commits. If you remember your EECS280 lectures on linked lists, you're gonna do fine here because git can be thought of as a singly linked list. Nodes in the graph are commit objects, each with a unique identifier in the form of a SHA-1 hash.

Here's a representation of the commit history for this website ...

```
* 8add55c - Tue, 24 May 2016 01:30:27 -0400 (2 days ago) (HEAD -> git-talk, origin/git-talk)
|           minor progress. Wondering about the value I add by writing another git tutorial. - Alex Chojnacki
* b3f7bb3 - Tue, 24 May 2016 00:33:17 -0400 (2 days ago)
|           added a few paragraphs to phil - Alex Chojnacki
*   2693e96 - Tue, 24 May 2016 00:01:22 -0400 (2 days ago)
|\            Merge branch 'master' into git-talk - Alex Chojnacki
| * 4677899 - Mon, 23 May 2016 23:53:31 -0400 (2 days ago) (origin/master, origin/HEAD, master)
| |           Fixed a bug in _layouts/post.html where heading image wouldn't load if it contained 'http' in the title. - Alex Chojnacki
* | 8046d87 - Mon, 23 May 2016 23:56:20 -0400 (2 days ago)
|/            inital post draft. Still working on it. - Alex Chojnacki
* cd7be2c - Sun, 22 May 2016 22:02:25 -0400 (3 days ago)
|           Added bios to 'About Us' - Alex Chojnacki
```

Here, we can see that the version history of this repository. Each commit is denoted by it's unique SHA-1 hash, known as a Commit ID. There are a few other things to note about this diagram, namely the split in path and the text in the parentheses. We'll address these soon enough. The key observation here is that git itself is merely a data structure. The consequence of this understanding is that git's commands are functions operating on this data structure. In turn, this informs the design of git. For instance, many of the functions in git do not change the actual structure of the existing repository, but simply add commits (commit objects) and update pointers.

Additionally, git is "steateless", meaning that the git program doesn't remember anything about your project between calls command line calls. All of it's operations are on the items in the `/.git/` folder in your git repository, so if presented two identical `/.git/` folders, git will operate on them in identical ways.

Take a look at the `/.git/` folder of this website's repo ...

```
.git/
├── COMMIT_EDITMSG
├── FETCH_HEAD
├── HEAD
├── ORIG_HEAD
├── config
├── description
├── hooks
│   ├── applypatch-msg.sample
│   ├── commit-msg.sample
│   ├── post-update.sample
│   ├── pre-applypatch.sample
│   ├── pre-commit.sample
│   ├── pre-push.sample
│   ├── pre-rebase.sample
│   ├── prepare-commit-msg.sample
│   └── update.sample
├── index
├── info
│   └── exclude
├── logs
│   ├── HEAD
│   └── refs
│       ├── heads
│       │   ├── git-talk
│       │   └── master
│       └── remotes
│           └── origin
│               ├── HEAD
│               ├── git-talk
│               └── master
├── objects
│   ├── 00
│   │   ├── 6e953102ded2db8e217e4507de3baa8bcc976d
│   │   ├── 9e333b5723d863a55e3ffb46bc8d39a81cebac
│   │   ├── ede78c5ac7facf21eb86cca17416cf873a7452
│   │   └── f45609a5b6a61d5e6f63723d0026d041c0a238
│   ├── 01
│   │   └── a1dc7a026132557bb1a454e038f132d421b5e9
│   ├── 02
│   │   ├── a94f6a88698cb01746c7ebcdda6f3b672aecaf
│   │   └── cb335c45257ad041cbe482adb1ef1cc8320730
    ...    ...    ...    ...    ...    ...    ...
│   ├── fd
│   │   ├── 21c3515e33c89865c375f27fa8793d47a40071
│   │   ├── 80543a7b0d700dcc3bee2a834fb64aedd92819
│   │   └── d8cf28efed61b7d31e07db3e4972c4c8134586
│   ├── fe
│   │   ├── 2fdfccf9a1faa2f4b34c381b8e7e6b59b03e55
│   │   ├── 444e23560cb93d9b4b797e10abe508a855d56a
│   │   ├── 72211b73ebd5e47ef488cf40a7368dbd9ef9df
│   │   ├── 72e87b8811bfab12878d11d7f92e44726a00d6
│   │   └── c2ef96a10122631eed07c419ec7140ed89a5fd
│   ├── info
│   └── pack
├── packed-refs
└── refs
    ├── heads
    │   ├── git-talk
    │   └── master
    ├── remotes
    │   └── origin
    │       ├── HEAD
    │       ├── git-talk
    │       └── master
    └── tags

227 directories, 419 files
```

That's a lot of files and folders! Everything git needs to reason about your project and it's changes over time is stored in this directory. Now, onward to basic usage!

## Basic Usage

### Initializing

```bash
$ git init sweet-new-project
Initialized empty Git repository in /Users/theLoaner/Development/repositories/sweet-new-project/.git/
```

Creating a git repository for an existing project is easy. Just navigate to project director and run `git init`

```bash
$ cd sweet-old-project
$ git init
Initialized empty Git repository in /Users/theLoaner/Development/repositories/sweet-old-project/.git/
```

**NOTE ::** Always make at least one commit to a repository before trying to do anything fancy with it. Many arcane bugs occur when working on a repository with no commit history.

### Committing

"Commit early and often" is a mantra to code by. Everytime you want to "save" work on a project, you'll want to commit it. Take the files you want to save and add them to the staging area with the `git add` command. Use `git status` git see what's already staged for the next commit.

Say I made some changes to the website and now I want to save those changes.

```bash
$ git add changed-file-1 changed-file-2
$ git status
On branch master

Initial commit

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)

	new file:   changed-file-1
	new file:   changed-file-2
```

Excellent! We've added the two new files to the staging area. Now, we want to commit these staged changes.

```bash
$ git commit -m "Changed two files. Fixes a bug. Closes issue #42"
[master (root-commit) 906e811] Changed two files. Fixes a bug. Closes issue #42
 2 files changed, 15 insertions(+), 2 deletions(-)
 create mode 100644 changed-file-1
 create mode 100644 changed-file-2
```

Git tells us some information about the commit after it runs. Here, it's reminding us that we changed two files and that, in total, we added 15 lines and removed 2 lines.

### Pushing
tbd ...
